# 2015 - Day 1: Not Quite Lisp

## Part 1

Santa was hoping for a white Christmas, but his weather machine's "snow" function is powered by stars, and he's fresh out! To save Christmas, he needs you to collect *fifty stars* by December 25th.

Collect stars by helping Santa solve puzzles. Two puzzles will be made available on each day in the Advent calendar; the second puzzle is unlocked when you complete the first. Each puzzle grants *one star*. Good luck!

Here's an easy puzzle to warm you up.

Santa is trying to deliver presents in a large apartment building, but he can't find the right floor - the directions he got are a little confusing. He starts on the ground floor (floor `0`) and then follows the instructions one character at a time.

An opening parenthesis, `(`, means he should go up one floor, and a closing parenthesis, `)`, means he should go down one floor.

The apartment building is very tall, and the basement is very deep; he will never find the top or bottom floors.

For example:

- `(())` and `()()` both result in floor `0`.
- `(((` and `(()(()(` both result in floor `3`.
- `))(((((` also results in floor `3`.
- `())` and `))(` both result in floor `-1` (the first basement level).
- `)))` and `)())())` both result in floor `-3`.

To *what floor* do the instructions take Santa?

## Part 2

Now, given the same instructions, find the *position* of the first character that causes him to enter the basement (floor `-1`). The first character in the instructions has position `1`, the second character has position `2`, and so on.

For example:

- `)` causes him to enter the basement at character position `1`.
- `()())` causes him to enter the basement at character position `5`.

What is the *position* of the character that causes Santa to first enter the basement?

## Solution

I'd previously completed the 2015 Day 1 challenge so I just reused that solution. I went way over the top and created a Class but the logic used is quite simple. At the time I think that I was trying to learn Object Oriented Python. The full solution, tests and input are available [here](https://github.com/davidcolton/aoc_2.0/tree/main/2015/day_01). 

```python
from collections import Counter
import aoc.data as d

input = "day_01.txt"

class Floor:
    def __init__(self, input: str):
        self.__instructions = [i for i in input]
        self.__floors_counter = Counter(input)
        self.__floor = 0
        self.__moves = 0

    @property
    def final_floor(self) -> int:
        return self.__floors_counter["("] - self.__floors_counter[")"]

    def move_up_floor(self):
        self.__floor += 1

    def move_down_floor(self):
        self.__floor -= 1

    @property
    def first_basement_visit(self) -> int:
        while self.__instructions and self.__floor >= 0:
            self.__moves += 1
            inst = self.__instructions.pop(0)
            self.move_up_floor() if inst == "(" else self.move_down_floor()
        return self.__moves
      
if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Simple import
    # Single line of data imported as a string
    raw_data = d.read_data(input)

    # Create an instance of the Floor class called santa
    santa = Floor(raw_data)

    print(f"Part 01: Santa is on floor: {santa.final_floor}")
    print(
        f"Part 02: Santa first went to the basement on move {santa.first_basement_visit}"
    ) 
```

### Imports

I decided that the first part of the challenge was basically just a simple counting exercise so what better way to do that in Python than to use a [Counter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.Counter). As I go along this journey to complete all 350 Advent of Code challenges, 2015 - 2021 at the time of writing, I'm going to put together a library of useful data import and data transformation and manipulation utilities. The `aoc.data` module has a simple `read_data`function to read in the challenge input as a string.

```python
from collections import Counter
import aoc.data as d
```

### Variables

Just a single variable. The name of the challenge data file.

```python
input = "day_01.txt"
```

### The `Floor` Class

As mentioned earlier implementing this as a Class is overkill. It does, however, break down the logic to solve parts one and two of this puzzle into easily consumable parts I think.

#### `__init__`

From the [Python Tutorial](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-__init__/) site:

> When you create a new object of a [class](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-class/), Python automatically calls the `__init__()` method to initialize the [object’s attributes](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-instance-variables/).

When creating an instance of the `Floor` class the input for the challenge is passed in as a string. On initialisation four attributes are created:

1. `self.__instructions` : The input is converted from a string to a list of characters i.e from `(())` to `['(', '(', ')', ')' ]`. We will use this list later to determine the first time Santa visits the basement.
2. `self.__floors_counter` : A Counter object is created from the input string. The Counter object will automatically count the number of `(`  and `)` brackets letting me easily calculate the floor Santa is on after all instructions have been followed.
3. `self.__floor` : As the instructions to change floor are followed one by one I'll update this variable to keep track of the floor Santa is on. Initialised to zero.
4. `self.__moves` : As the instructions to change floor are followed one by one I'll update this variable to keep track of the number of moves Santa has made. Initialised to zero.

```python
def __init__(self, input: str):
  self.__instructions = [i for i in input]
  self.__floors_counter = Counter(input)
  self.__floor = 0
  self.__moves = 0
```

#### `@property`

I use the `@property` decorator twice in the `Floor` class to allow me to access the `final_floor` and `first_basement_visit` functions as if they were properties. More information about the `@property` decorator can be found [here](https://www.tutorialsteacher.com/python/property-decorator).

#### `final_floor`

To get the floor Santa is on if he completes the entire input instructions we can use the counter object created previously to simply subtract the number of down instructions `self.__floors_counter[")"]` from the number of up instructions `self.__floors_counter[")"]`  and return this value.

```python
def final_floor(self) -> int:
  return self.__floors_counter["("] - self.__floors_counter[")"]
```

#### `move_up_floor` and `move_down_floor`

The `move_up_floor` and `move_down_floor` functions simply increment or decrement the `self.__floor` variable by 1 each time the fuction is called. These are helper functions for the `first_basement_visit`.

```python
def move_up_floor(self):
  self.__floor += 1

def move_down_floor(self):
  self.__floor -= 1
```

#### ` first_basement_visit`

The final method in the `Floor` class is the function to calculate the number of moves it takes Santa to reach the Basement for the first time. This is implemented using a simple `while` loop:

While there are more instructions to consume, i.e. `self.__instructions` is not empty, and `self.__floor` is greater than zero do:

1. `self.__moves += 1` increment the number of moves made by 1.
2. `inst = self.__instructions.pop(0)` pop the next instruction, move up a floor or move down a floor, from the instrictions list.
3. `self.move_up_floor() if inst == "(" else self.move_down_floor()` if the instruction is a move up instruction increment the floor by 1 otherwise it's a move down instruction so decrement the floor by 1.
4. Return the number of moves taken

```python
def first_basement_visit(self) -> int:
  while self.__instructions and self.__floor >= 0:
    self.__moves += 1
    inst = self.__instructions.pop(0)
    self.move_up_floor() if inst == "(" else self.move_down_floor()
    return self.__moves
```

There are two small niaeve issues with this approach:

1. It assumes that there are no error instructions i.e. that there are no other instructions other than the `(` and `)` characters.
2. It assumes that the basement is actually reached otherwise the total number of moves is returned when the list of instructions is exhausted.

Both of these would be easy enough to fix if required.

#### Running the Program

Nothing very exciting in the main script to run the program and get the results for part 1 and part 2. Simply read the data, create the instance of the `Floor` class. Print out the results:

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Simple import
    # Single line of data imported as a string
    raw_data = d.read_data(input)

    # Create an instance of the Floor class called santa
    santa = Floor(raw_data)

    print(f"Part 01: Santa is on floor: {santa.final_floor}")
    print(
        f"Part 02: Santa first went to the basement on move {santa.first_basement_visit}"
    ) 
```

## Other approaches

As part of this exercise I want to review solutions from others to see if there are any tricks or optimisations that I could learn. For this I'm using the [Reddit: Advent of Code Solutions Megathread](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/wiki/solution_megathreads) and also the [Advent of Code Repository](https://github.com/GeoffRiley/AdventOfCode) of an acquaintance who has completed all challenges. As I get deeper into the puzzles I know that I will need to learn new techniques to complete the challenges so I'll eventually switch from reviewing other solutions after I've solved them to reviewing them so that I can figure out how to solve them myself.

I found the following interesting alternative solutions.

```python
def find_floor(brackets: str) -> int:
    return sum(1 if c == '(' else -1 for c in brackets)

def find_basement_entry(brackets: str) -> int:
    return [n + 1 for n in range(len(brackets)) if find_floor(brackets[:n + 1]) == -1][0]
```

This first, above, uses [Generator Comprehension](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/comprehensions-in-python/) to solve part 1. Then to solve part 2 list comprenension is used with list slicing, along with the solution to part 1, to determine every time Santa visits the basement. The first element of the list represents the first time the basement is visited. The only issue I see here is that if there was a very large number of instructions and santa visited the basement the first time early one all other remaining instructions still need to be processed.

Below is an interesting solution to part 2 that uses [Itertool Accumulate function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/itertools.html#itertools.accumulate). This is creating a list of the history of Santa's travells up and down the floors. Once all instructions are consumed the solution to part 2 is the `index()` of `-1` . The `+ 1` is required because the Python List in `0` indexed but the first instruction is numbered `1` . 

```python
list(itertools.accumulate([1 if b == '(' else -1 for x in in_string])).index(-1) + 1
```

