# 2016 - Day 1: No Time for a Taxicab

## Part 1

Santa's sleigh uses a very high-precision clock to guide its movements, and the clock's oscillator is regulated by stars. Unfortunately, the stars have been stolen... by the Easter Bunny. To save Christmas, Santa needs you to retrieve all *fifty stars* by December 25th.

Collect stars by solving puzzles. Two puzzles will be made available on each day in the Advent calendar; the second puzzle is unlocked when you complete the first. Each puzzle grants *one star*. Good luck!

You're airdropped near *Easter Bunny Headquarters* in a city somewhere. "Near", unfortunately, is as close as you can get - the instructions on the Easter Bunny Recruiting Document the Elves intercepted start here, and nobody had time to work them out further.

The Document indicates that you should start at the given coordinates (where you just landed) and face North. Then, follow the provided sequence: either turn left (`L`) or right (`R`) 90 degrees, then walk forward the given number of blocks, ending at a new intersection.

There's no time to follow such ridiculous instructions on foot, though, so you take a moment and work out the destination. Given that you can only walk on the [street grid of the city](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry), how far is the shortest path to the destination?

For example:

- Following `R2, L3` leaves you `2` blocks East and `3` blocks North, or `5`blocks away.
- `R2, R2, R2` leaves you `2` blocks due South of your starting position, which is `2` blocks away.
- `R5, L5, R5, R3` leaves you `12` blocks away.

*How many blocks away* is Easter Bunny HQ?

## Part 2

Then, you notice the instructions continue on the back of the Recruiting Document. Easter Bunny HQ is actually at the first location you visit twice.

For example, if your instructions are `R8, R4, R4, R8`, the first location you visit twice is `4` blocks away, due East.

How many blocks away is the *first location you visit twice*?

## Solution

Probably over engineered again but a nice solution that includes both part one and part two in a single class / method. I thought that for a day one challenge this was probably the most difficult of the five I'd done to date. The full solution, tests and input are available [here](https://github.com/davidcolton/aoc_2.0/tree/main/2016/day_01). 

```python
from collections import namedtuple
from aoc.data import read_data as rd
from aoc.data import comma_separated_strings_to_list as cs

input = "day_01.txt"

class StreetGrid:

    Instruction = namedtuple("Instruction", ["direction", "distance"])
    CompassPoint = namedtuple("CompasPoint", ["x_mul", "y_mul", "new_direction"])

    compass = {
        "N": {
            "L": CompassPoint(-1, 0, "W"),
            "R": CompassPoint(1, 0, "E"),
        },
        "E": {
            "L": CompassPoint(0, 1, "N"),
            "R": CompassPoint(0, -1, "S"),
        },
        "S": {
            "L": CompassPoint(1, 0, "E"),
            "R": CompassPoint(-1, 0, "W"),
        },
        "W": {
            "L": CompassPoint(0, -1, "S"),
            "R": CompassPoint(0, 1, "N"),
        },
    }

    def __init__(self, input: list) -> None:
        self.__instructions = [self.Instruction(ins[0], int(ins[1:])) for ins in input]
        self.__facing = "N"
        self.__grid_position = [0, 0]

    def shortest_path(self, visited_twice: bool = False) -> int:
        facing = self.__facing
        position = self.__grid_position

        visited = set()

        for ins in self.__instructions:

            this_path = set()

            move = self.compass[facing][ins.direction]

            steps = range(ins.distance)
            for _ in steps:
                position = [
                    position[0] + move.x_mul * 1,
                    position[1] + move.y_mul * 1,
                ]

                this_path.add(tuple(position))

            facing = move.new_direction

            if visited_twice and visited.intersection(this_path):
                position = visited.intersection(this_path).pop()
                return abs(position[0]) + abs(position[1])
            else:
                visited = visited | this_path

        return abs(position[0]) + abs(position[1])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    raw_data = rd(input)

    data = cs(raw_data)

    s = StreetGrid(data)

    print(f"PART 01: Easter Bunny HQ is {s.shortest_path()} blocks away.")
    print(
        f"PART 02: The first location you visit twice is {s.shortest_path(visited_twice=True)} blocks away."
    )

```

### Imports

It was clear that I'd need to use some kind of lookup mechanism to handle each instruction. For example, if I'm facing north and I've to go right 5 blocks how does that translate to positive and negative steps in the `x` and `y` directions. A `R5` instruction means 4 different things if you're facing `N`, `S`, `E` or `W`. To handle these different, changing implementation you could just use a list and reply on indexing. I preferred to use [Named Tuples](https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.namedtuple).  

The `aoc.data` module has a simple `read_data` function to read in the challenge input as a string and a `comma_separated_strings_to_list` function to convert a single comma separated string to a list of strings.

```python
from collections import namedtuple
from aoc.data import read_data as rd
from aoc.data import comma_separated_strings_to_list as cs
```

### Variables

Just a single variable. The name of the challenge data file.

```python
input = "day_01.txt"
```

### The `StreetGrid` Class

As mentioned earlier implementing this as a Class was probably overkill. It does, however, break down the logic to solve parts one and two of this puzzle into easily consumable parts I think.

The `StreetGrid` contains two named tuples and a dictionary variable.

The `Instruction` named tuple is used to allow easy access to the  instructions to follow.

It contains two items:

* `direction`: The direction to follow

* `distance`: The distance to travel in the

```python
Instruction = namedtuple("Instruction", ["direction", "distance"])
```

Using a named tuple allow the elements of the tuple to be accessed as `ins.direction` and `ins.distance` opposed to having to use indexing.



The `CompassPoint` named tuple is used to allow easy access to the values required to move according to each instruction.

It contains three items:

* `x_mul`: The number of blocks to move in the x direction +1 east, -1 west

* `y_mul`: The number of blocks to move in the y direction +1 north, -1 south

* `new_direction`: After folling the Instruction the direction you'll be facing

```python
CompassPoint = namedtuple("CompasPoint", ["x_mul", "y_mul", "new_direction"])
```

The `compass` dictionary dictates how each Instruction is processed. The compass has 4 keys `N`, `E`, `S` and `W`. This is the direction you are facing.

The value of each compass key is itself a dictionary with `L` & `R` keys. The value of each `L` & `R` key is a `Compass` point that allows you travel through the grid.

#### `__init__`

From the [Python Tutorial](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-__init__/) site:

> When you create a new object of a [class](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-class/), Python automatically calls the `__init__()` method to initialize the [object’s attributes](https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-instance-variables/).

When creating an instance of the `StreetGrid` class the input for the challenge is passed in as a list of strings. On initialisation three attributes are created:

1. `self.__instructions` : The input is converted from a list of strings to a list of `Instructions` named tuples.
2. `self.__facing` : The direction you are facing when starting the challenge is always `N` or North.
3. `self.__grid_position` : You always start the challenge at block, grid, position `0, 0`.

```python
def __init__(self, input: list) -> None:
  self.__instructions = [self.Instruction(ins[0], int(ins[1:])) for ins in input]
  self.__facing = "N"
  self.__grid_position = [0, 0]
```

#### `shortest_path`

The `StreetGrid` class has one main method that's used to solve both parts of the challenge.

```python
def shortest_path(self, visited_twice: bool = False) -> int:
```

The `shortest_path` function follows the grid based instructions to calculate the distance from the starting point to the location of the Bunny's Headquarters. The naive way follows all instructions and calculates the Manhattan Distance. The alternative way, when `visited_twice=True` calculates the distance from the starting point to the first block, grid, position visited twice.

We start by getting the initial starting grid position and the direction we are facing. In this challenge we always start ar `0, 0` and facing `N`, North, so having these values set on initialisation could easily have been avoided, especially as they are not passed as arguments.

I also create an empty set to remember all the grid positions we have visited. This was not required for part one and was only added to implement the solution for part two.

```python
facing = self.__facing
position = self.__grid_position

# An empty set to hold the grid positions visited
visited = set()
```

We then iterate over each instruction. To start an empty set is created to hold all the grid positions visited by this instruction and the details of how the instruction is to be executed is retrieved from the `compass` dictionary.

```python
# For each instruction
for ins in self.__instructions:

  # The grid locations visited in the execution of this instruction
  this_path = set()

  # Get the details of how this instructions move are to be executed
  move = self.compass[facing][ins.direction]

```

Next each instruction is followed one block at a time and each block, grid, position visited is added the `this_path` set. Initially, when implemented for part one, only the exact grid positions indicated by each instruction were calculated. That mean what the position list was calculated by multiply by the `ins.distance`. However, for part two all grid positions visited had to be recorded so the distance was used to create a range and then the position was incremented by 1 each time. Once all steps in the instruction the direction Santa is facing is updated.

```python
  # For each single step in the instruction
  steps = range(ins.distance)
  for _ in steps:
    # Get the next position
    position = [
      position[0] + move.x_mul * 1,
      position[1] + move.y_mul * 1,
    ]

    # And add it to the path
    this_path.add(tuple(position))

  # After all steps you are now facing
  facing = move.new_direction

```

Lastly we need to check if we are solving for part one or part 2. If solving for part 2 it is checked if there is an intersection between the path traveled in this step and all the other previous positions visited. If there is then that is the position that is first visited twice so then this is the location of the Bunny's Headquarters. The distance to this position is calculated and returned.

Otherwise the next step is consumed and once all steps are consumed we calculate the distance to the final position and this is the distance to the headquarters.

```python
  # Check if this path contains a grid position already visited
  if visited_twice and visited.intersection(this_path):

    # If so return the distance to this position
    twice_visited_position = visited.intersection(this_path).pop()
    return abs(twice_visited_position[0]) + abs(twice_visited_position[1])
  
  else:

    # Other add the grid position in the path to the visited set
    visited = visited | this_path

return abs(position[0]) + abs(position[1])
```

#### Running the Program

Nothing very exciting in the main script to run the program and get the results for part 1 and part 2. Simply read the data and create a list of strings then create the instance of the `StreetGrid` class. Print out the results:

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    raw_data = rd(input)

    data = cs(raw_data)

    s = StreetGrid(data)

    print(f"PART 01: Easter Bunny HQ is {s.shortest_path()} blocks away.")
    print(
        f"PART 02: The first location you visit twice is {s.shortest_path(visited_twice=True)} blocks away."
    )
```

## Other approaches

As part of this exercise I want to review solutions from others to see if there are any tricks or optimisations that I could learn. For this I'm using the [Reddit: Advent of Code Solutions Megathread](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/wiki/solution_megathreads) and also the [Advent of Code Repository](https://github.com/GeoffRiley/AdventOfCode) of an acquaintance who has completed all challenges. As I get deeper into the puzzles I know that I will need to learn new techniques to complete the challenges so I'll eventually switch from reviewing other solutions after I've solved them to reviewing them so that I can figure out how to solve them myself.

I found the following  alternative solution to part 1 fascinating by [Ape3000](https://www.reddit.com/user/Ape3000/). There is no need to store the direction, just rotate the world. :)

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3

import sys

steps = sys.stdin.readlines()[0].strip().split(", ")

x = 0
y = 0

for step in steps:
    if step[0] == "R":
        x, y = -y, x
    else:
        x, y = y, -x

    x += int(step[1:])

print(abs(x) + abs(y))
```

This first, above, uses [Generator Comprehension](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/comprehensions-in-python/) to solve part 1. Then to solve part 2 list comprenension is used with list slicing, along with the solution to part 1, to determine every time Santa visits the basement. The first element of the list represents the first time the basement is visited. The only issue I see here is that if there was a very large number of instructions and santa visited the basement the first time early one all other remaining instructions still need to be processed.

Below is an interesting solution to part 2 that uses [Itertool Accumulate function](https://docs.python.org/3/library/itertools.html#itertools.accumulate). This is creating a list of the history of Santa's travells up and down the floors. Once all instructions are consumed the solution to part 2 is the `index()` of `-1` . The `+ 1` is required because the Python List in `0` indexed but the first instruction is numbered `1` . 

```python
list(itertools.accumulate([1 if b == '(' else -1 for x in in_string])).index(-1) + 1
```

